Python revision (#2103)
CSCfi/csc-user-guide: docs/support/tutorials/python-usage-guide.md

# Using Python on CSC supercomputers

Some important aspects of working with the Python programming language
are notably different on CSC supercomputers compared to usage on a personal
device or in other HPC environments. To make the most of the computational
resources available to you, it is helpful to be aware of the differences.

See the
[Python application page](../../apps/python.md)
for general information on the Python language and
pre-installed Python environments on CSC supercomputers.

## Creating and managing Python environments

### Installing Python packages to existing modules

If there is a CSC-provided module that covers _almost_ everything you
need, but it is missing a few Python packages, you can try installing
those yourself with the pip package manager.

See the [package lists on our Python application
page](../../apps/python.md#pre-installed-python-environments) to find out
which packages are installed in existing modules.
If you think that some important package should be included by default
in a module provided by CSC, don't hesitate to contact our [Service
Desk](../contact.md).

> === "Using `venv`"

Reviewer: As a usability/cosmetic issue I find it confusing with the tab as you can't see what part of the text is the one that will change. Maybe there could be some line or border around the area that belongs to the "tabbable" area?

Author: Good point, I was wondering about that too. All tabbed content is now inside "default" type admonitions.

Reviewer: Now it much clearer what belongs to the tab. Those boxes look a bit "heavy", but I don't know of a better solution. Maybe ask @joonas-somero ?

Reviewer 2: How about a simple horizontal rule? Like this:

```markdown
---

## Creating your own Python environments
```

Reviewer 2: Also, should the admonitions have titles? Instead of just `!!! info`, perhaps for example `!!! info "Module compatibility"` would be more appropriate.

Reviewer 2: > How about a simple horizontal rule? Like this:

This is what it looks like:
![image](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/assets/50655931/86a0d9a6-83af-4e2b-9049-defb64e593bc)

Author: @rkronberg suggested removing the nested admonitions, which I did. The boxes look much more visually pleasing to me now. Do we feel there still a need for using something else (e.g. the horizontal rule @joonas-somero suggested)?

![image](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/assets/91546703/7a7f7d0d-c78c-4def-879c-4ff63e3c586e)

Reviewer 2: The admonitions are in danger of becoming severely overused and using them merely as a border looks, IMO, really heavy. How about a CSS solution? Here's one with a light border:
![image](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/assets/50655931/44fc660a-6170-4a78-9998-fd3edfa5ec9c)

Author: Okay, makes sense. I replaced the admonitions with a horizontal rule, since it matches nicely with the automatically created rule at the start of the tab

Author: I also gave some more descriptive titles to the info boxes

![image](https://github.com/CSCfi/csc-user-guide/assets/91546703/e7395a0d-1359-44ab-831f-05e2727a5e37)

Reviewer 3: I think this is a good point by @joonas-somero 
Admonitions should be used to draw special attention, and if they are used too much, it seems to defeat the purpose (user is expected to pay special attention to "everything"). In this sense, the horizontal rule would be better. Perhaps custom CSS is overkill?

	The recommended way to add packages on top of an existing environment
	is to use [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html), which
	is a standard Python module for creating a lightweight "virtual
	environment". You can have multiple virtual environments, for example
	one for each project.

	For example to install a package called `whatshap` on top of the
	CSC-provided [python-data](../../apps/python-data.md) module:

	```bash

> 	cd /projappl/<your_project>  # change this to the appropriate path for your project

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	cd /projappl/<your_project>/<venv_name>  # change this to the appropriate path for your project
```

Reviewer: Actually I think the original is correct as the command `python3 -m venv --system-site-packages venv` will create the venv directory. Instead that command could be changed to:

`python3 -m venv --system-site-packages <venv_name>`

to make it clear that you can give it whatever name you want.

Reviewer 4: Ok, sorry, if that is the case. But then it could be commented that venv creates this folder. (For example in Tykky empty folder must exist before.)

Author: Is the project `/projappl` directory the optimal place for creating venvs? At least VSCode automatically sources virtual environments found in an opened "folder", so instructing users to create them in whichever is their working directory might have its benefits

Reviewer 4: /projappl is permanent during projects, from scratch in a half a year, it might get deleted. So in general it is recommended to use /projappl for installations.

Author: Makes sense :) I changed `venv` to `<venv_name>` and wrote in the info box below that there is no need to create a directory for the environment since `venv` takes care of it

	module load python-data
	python3 -m venv --system-site-packages venv
	source venv/bin/activate
	pip install whatshap
	```
	!!! note ""

	    Don't forget to use the `--system-site-packages` flag when creating
	    the virtual environment, otherwise the environment will not find the
	    pre-installed packages from the base module (for example `numpy` from
	    `python-data`).

	Later when you wish to use the virtual environment you only need to
	load the module and activate the environment:

	```bash
	module load python-data

> 	source /projappl/<your_project>/venv/bin/activate

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
	source /projappl/<your_project>/<venv_name>/venv/bin/activate
```

	2. An alternative to using Tykky is creating a conda environment
	   inside a custom Apptainer container. This is a practical choice if, for
	   example, you know of a suitable ready-made Apptainer or Docker container.
	   For more information about using Apptainer containers, please see the
	   related documentation:

		* [Running Apptainer containers](../../computing/containers/run-existing.md)
		* [Creating Apptainer containers](../../computing/containers/creating.md),
	  	including how to convert Docker containers to Apptainer containers.

	The [CSC conda tutorial](./conda.md) describes in more detail
	what conda is and how to use it. Some parts of the tutorial may
	also be helpful for Tykky installations.

## Python development environments

Python code can be edited with a console-based [text editor directly on the
supercomputer](./env-guide/text-and-image-processing.md).
Codes can also be edited on your local machine and copied to the supercomputer
with [scp](../../data/moving/scp.md) or [graphical file transfer
tools](../../data/moving/graphical_transfer.md).
You can also [edit Python scripts in Puhti from your local
PC](./remote-dev.md) with some code editors like Visual

> Studio Code.

Reviewer: For Visual Studio Code there could be a link to this page: 
https://docs.csc.fi/support/tutorials/remote-dev/#visual-studio-code-with-remote-ssh-plugin
or this one: https://docs.csc.fi/apps/vscode/

Author: I created a separate subsection for VSCode, since there were already ones for Jupyter and Spyder. It includes links to the VSCode OOD app page as well as the instructions for using the remote ssh plugin

> Finally, several graphical programming environments can be used directly on the

Reviewer 4: Should this be rather first option?

Author: Yes, it should definitely be recommended over remote dev for most users. It's second now, right after text-based editors ;)

supercomputer, such as Jupyter Notebooks, Spyder and Visual Studio Code, through
the [Puhti web interface](../../computing/webinterface/index.md).

### Jupyter Notebooks

> [Jupyter Notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) allows one to run Python code via a web

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[Jupyter Notebooks](https://jupyter.org/) allows one to run Python code Puhti or Mahti web interface.
```

Author: I understood that this was referring to how Jupyter notebooks are opened with a web browser when running them locally. In any case, I removed this part and introduce Jupyter more generally as an "interactive programming environment".

browser running on a local PC. The notebooks can combine code, equations,
visualizations and narrative text in a single document. Many of our modules, including
[python-data](../../apps/python-data.md), the deep learning modules and
[geoconda](../../apps/geoconda.md)
include the Jupyter notebook package. See the tutorial [how to set up and connect to
a Jupyter Notebook](./rstudio-or-jupyter-notebooks.md) for using

> Jupyter in CSC environment.

Reviewer: If you don't read carefully, on the linked page `rstudio-or-jupyter-notebooks.md` you can easily miss the fact that the easiest (and recommended) way of launching Jupyter Notebook is via Open Ondemand, not via ssh-tunneling etc. We should probably here link directly to the OOD apps.

Author: The section now links to OOD and ssh-tunneling separately, and OOD is presented as the recommended option.

[geoconda](../../apps/geoconda.md)
have Spyder included. The best option for using it is through the [Puhti
web interface remote desktop](../../computing/webinterface/desktop.md).

## Python parallel jobs

Python has several different packages for parallel processing:

* [multiprocessing](https://docs.python.org/3/library/multiprocessing.html)
* [joblib](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
* [dask](https://docs.dask.org)
* [mpi4py](https://mpi4py.readthedocs.io) - Python interface to MPI

The `multiprocessing` package is likely the easiest to use and as it is part of the
Python standard library it is included in all Python installations. `joblib` provides
some more flexibility. `multiprocessing` and `joblib` are suitable for one
node (max 40 cores). `dask` is the most versatile and has several options for
parallelization. Please see [CSC's Dask tutorial](./dask-python.md)
which includes both single-node (max 40 cores) and multi-node examples.

See our GitHub repository for some [examples for using the different parallelization
options with Puhti](https://github.com/csc-training/geocomputing/tree/master/python/puhti).

> The `mpi4py` is not included in the current Python environments in CSC supercomputers,

Reviewer: Actually pytorch has mpi4py. Maybe it should be added to python-data in the future?

Author: The section now mentions that `mpi4py` is included in the `pytorch` module.

# Using Python on CSC supercomputers

Some important aspects of working with the Python programming language
are notably different on CSC supercomputers compared to usage on a personal
device or in other HPC environments. To make the most of the computational
resources available to you, it is helpful to be aware of the differences.

See the
[Python application page](../../apps/python.md)
for general information on the Python language and
pre-installed Python environments on CSC supercomputers.

## Creating and managing Python environments

### Installing Python packages to existing modules

If there is a CSC-provided module that covers _almost_ everything you
need, but it is missing a few Python packages, you can try installing
those yourself with the pip package manager.

See the [package lists on our Python application

> page](../../apps/python.md#pre-installed-python-environments) to find out

Reviewer 2: The test scripts in _tests/_ are based on _grep_, so they don't see links that span multiple lines. My suggestion (for now) is to disregard any line length limits when it comes to links.

Author: All links are now single-line

which packages are installed in existing modules.
If you think that some important package should be included by default
in a module provided by CSC, don't hesitate to contact our [Service
Desk](../contact.md).

=== "Using `venv`"
	!!! default ""
		The recommended way to add packages on top of an existing environment
		is to use [venv](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html), which
		is a standard Python module for creating a lightweight "virtual
		environment". You can have multiple virtual environments, for example
		one for each project.

		For example to install a package called `whatshap` on top of the
		CSC-provided [python-data](../../apps/python-data.md) module:

		```bash
		cd /projappl/<your_project>  # change this to the appropriate path for your project
		module load python-data
		python3 -m venv --system-site-packages <venv_name>
		source <venv_name>/bin/activate
		pip install whatshap

> 		```
>         Unlike for example Tykky, `venv` creates a new directory for the

Reviewer 2: There needs to be an empty line after code blocks. Otherwise the following text will not be placed inside a `<p>` block, but as loose text.

```suggestion
		```

        Unlike for example Tykky, `venv` creates a new directory for the
```

Author: There is now an empty line after each code block
